Intelligence Task Force meeting for
September. We have a uh we'll go ahead
and have a roll call.
Senator Neimus
>> Senator Rawlings
>> present.
>> Senator Thomas.
Senator Williams
>> here.
>> Representative Layman
>> Representative Lewis
>> here.
>> Representative Miles
>> Representative Payne.
Co-chair Bray.
Chair Maize Bledsoe
>> present.
All right. Seeing we have a quorum, I
will have uh entertain a motion for the
approval of the minutes from the August
14th meeting.
>> Second.
>> There's a second. Thank you. All those
approved, please say I.
>> I.
>> Any. Thank you very much for that. We
have a really um exciting agenda this
morning. We've been focusing so far kind
of on the internal conversations of AI
and today we're going to have an
external conversation about AI. And
first up is artificial intelligence in
the retail sector. and they're joining
us online, I believe, this morning.
Do I see Caroline and Mercy? There you
both are. Good morning. If you'll please
introduce yourselves, and you may have
the floor for a presentation.
>> Good morning. Um, thank you, Chair
Bledsoe, and the members of the AI task
force for having us. Um, we're sorry we
can't be there in Frankfurt with you all
today, but we hope to visit you all
soon. Uh, my name is Mercy Beieler. I'm
the vice president of government
relations uh here at National Retail
Federation. Uh the National Retail
Federation, if you all don't know, uh is
a trade association that represents both
small and large businesses across uh the
United States. Um we represent small mom
and pop Main Street and also large
businesses like your big box retailers.
Um we employ 52 million jobs and we are
the largest private sector employer. Um
I want to thank Shannon from the
Kentucky Retailers also for uh welcoming
us and giving us the opportunity. and
I'll kick it off to my colleague
Caroline.
>> Thank you so much Mercy and thank you so
much to the task force again for having
us. Um I'm gonna go ahead and share my
screen. We have a short presentation
for you all
um
to walk through some of the use cases in
the retail sector. And um of course uh
we very much welcome any questions
throughout the process, but I'll be sure
to leave time for Q&A at the end as
well. So um can everyone see my screen
just first off? Perfect. Thank you so
much. Um so like Mercy said, my name is
Caroline Rupert. I am the director of AI
and technology policy as well as the
associate director of the center for
digital risk and innovation at the
National Retail Federation. Um so just
to kind of run through what we're going
to talk about today. First um we'll talk
about NRF. We'll walk through some of
the retail use cases and how the retail
sector is using AI. Um we also want to
highlight some of the principles that
we've developed for our member companies
for the responsible use of AI in the
retail sector and then close out with
some policy considerations uh for for
you all to uh to discuss.
So, like Mercy said, NRF is the largest
trade association representing the
retail sector. We represent everyone
from the biggest of the big retailers
all the way down to mom and pop stores.
Um, we also have close relationships
with our state retail association. So,
um, like Mercy said, thank you to to
Shannon at the Kentucky Retailer
Federation to uh for setting this up.
Um, just to give you a bit of context
about the Center for Digital Risk and
Innovation. Um, so we are really the the
research and the writing arm of NRF when
it comes to key technology issues. So we
uh develop guidelines, recommendations
for best practices, things of that
nature specifically related to AI, cyber
security and fraud prevention.
So to give you some context for how
retail has used AI in the past, um even
though it seems like AI is you know this
uh big new fancy thing that has popped
up only recently, retailers have been
using AI for quite a while and then
really just as the technology has grown
and developed and changed over time.
Likewise, the deployment of the
technology has grown and developed and
changed over time. So especially over
the last three years um retail while we
tend to think of um you know software IT
companies the tech industry when it
comes to the deployment of AI retailers
are one of the biggest deployers of AI
were among the top three uh second to
the financial services sector and then
along with the soft software and IT
sector. So retail um really has invested
a lot in this technology over the years
and um you know we're very excited about
where it's heading um and uh yeah very
very excited to to be here to to talk
about some of the policy implications of
the deployment.
So um AI tools really are um integrated
into a wide swath of uh different
instances when it comes to retail. Um
and ultimately the goal of any of the
deployment of these tools is to enhance
the customer experience as well as the
employee experience. So when we talk
about some of the specific use cases, I
tend to think about them in three
buckets. Consumerf facing, employee
facing and internal use cases. So the
consumerf facing use cases are probably
the ones that we all as customers
ourselves think of first when we think
about how AI is used in the retail
sector. Things like customer service
chat bots um you know gen autogenerated
product descriptions and marketing tools
things like that that we as consumers
have interaction with. But I think where
some of the really interesting use cases
happen is on the employee and the
internal facing side of things. So one
of the use cases that we've seen pop up
over the last few years has been um this
use of company specific Genai apps for
store employees. So this is a really
good example of AI being used to empower
employees. Um so the the specific
example it in this case would be a
retailer who has their own app for
employee use is now trained on the
employee manual. So retailers you know
historically a very seasonal business uh
you know sometimes short-term uh lots of
short-term employees um especially
around those seasonal high points. Um,
if a customer walks into the store and
has a specific question and the employee
doesn't know the answer to it, um,
instead of calling over the manager to
assist the customer, employees now have
the opportunity to use, um, almost like
a chat GPT app that again is trained on
their employee manual to ask the
question that the customer has, give an
accurate answer, and then the customer
can go on about their day. the employee
can go on to their next task and the
manager um can continue using their time
um in other ways. So it really gets at
this idea of AI being used to enhance
the customer experience enhance employee
um the the employee experience as well.
We also are seeing um retailers use AI
for HR and benefits related
applications. Generally speaking, retail
tends to employ or deploy AI in lowrisk
use cases. The HR and benefits related
applications is the one notable
exception to that. Obviously, AI um you
know uh applied in these sorts of
circumstances uh is is a high-risisk
consideration. Um but uh that's really
the the one um that uh uh the one that
kind of stands out among the rest of the
other retailer deployments. Um and then
of course uh employee upskilling and
reskilling is very important to the
retail sector as well. When it comes to
some of the internal use cases um we've
really seen AI uh play uh a really
useful role when it comes to supply
chain uh forecasting, inventory
planning, things like that. um you know
obviously the the um uh the trade market
at the moment is um you know uh a bit
unpredictable so it's it's been helpful
for our retailers to have additional
tools uh such as AI powered tools in
these circumstances to help them
navigate um you know their their
inventory management processes. Uh we
also have seen some interesting
applications when it comes to enhanced
fraud detection and prevention measures
uh both in terms of being able to detect
fraud patterns uh potentially earlier
than otherwise possible um or also in a
in a cyber security sense as well and
then of course coding and application
development um as well.
Now given these use cases, a few years
ago, NRF developed principles for the
use of uh the responsible use of AI in
the retail sector. And these were meant
to be guidelines for our member
companies as they were just starting to
think seriously about some of these um
you know bigger deployments of AI
powered tools.
So we really broke uh broke these
principles into four different
categories. governance and risk
management, customer engagement and
trust, workforce applications and use,
and then business partner
accountability. Um, I will warn you
there's a lot of text on these upcoming
slides. I'm happy to circulate these
afterwards. Um, so you can take a read
through them, but I'll just walk you
through some of the highlights.
So starting off with the governance and
risk management piece, uh we wanted to
make sure that retailers are deploying
strong internal governance of AI tools.
Um you know, especially when it comes to
managing risks and ensuring that these
tools are delivering the expected
benefits. Um we actually just uh fielded
a survey of our members on um that
focused a significant amount on AI
governance and risk management and kind
of how this process is going. Um we're
in the process of going through the data
and we expect the report to be released
publicly probably midocctober. Um, so
this is something that's really
important to us, really important to our
members, and um, I'm happy to follow up
with the task force um, once that that
report is uh, has been concluded and um,
and released.
Next up, we have the customer engagement
uh, component. So, we want to make sure
that retailers are transparent about
their uses of AI, especially those that
have an effect on the customer. Um,
retail is one of those industries where
customer trust is our bread and butter.
Um, it is highly competitive industry
with low friction. So, if a customer,
you know, doesn't have a a good
relationship with a retailer, it's
pretty easy for them to just choose to
go and shop elsewhere. um you know it's
not quite like financial services or you
know the insurance sector where it's
very very difficult to transfer your
services from one to another. Um but
with retailer with retail that that's
not the case. So, you know, customer um
uh support and trust is always at the
center of our industry and making sure
that we are clear and transparent about
where we're using these tools um is is
very important to us.
So these these points kind of get at a
similar idea of focusing on that
consumer trust, ensuring that these
tools are enhancing the customer
experience and um you know we don't want
to undermine that that trust at all
and um making sure that um any AI
enabled technology um you know is
compliant with existing laws on the
books. Um, one of the interesting but
sometimes complicated pieces of AI
policy as I know you all are very well
aware is um because of how farreaching
it is and these tools can be the number
of existing laws and regulations that
already um can regulate AI tools. Um
it's there are a lot of them out there.
So making sure that any um laws any any
of these tools that are that occupy a
digital space are in compliance with any
existing laws whether they were meant to
originally meant to um regulate a
digital space or not. Um that's that's
very important to our members as well.
Next up we have our workforce
applications and use cases. Um, so we
want to make sure that retailers engage
in ongoing oversight and review of any
of these applications. Um, like I said,
this is one of the few high-risk use
cases that um, retailers um, use AI for.
So, we want to make sure that there is a
level of transparency when it comes to
how um, retailers are using these tools
in relation to their workforce.
Um, and again going back to a similar
idea of making sure that any of these
tools are deployed in compliance with
any existing laws on the books such as
anti-discrimination laws, things of that
nature.
And then lastly, we have our business
partner accountability. So, generally
retailers uh occupy a deployer space in
the industry. Um there are a few
exceptions for retailers who are um
actively developing their own tools, but
for the vast majority of these use
cases, um retailers are purchasing an AI
powered tool from a deployer, excuse me,
from a developer company and not making
substantial modifications to that tool
and using it as is. So making sure that
those contracts, that business partner
accountability is strong and there's a
good level of transparency and clear
guidelines and expectations established
between the retailer and any third party
that they are purchasing these tools
from um is is very important again
especially when we're talking about some
of the high-risisk use cases.
Now I want to close out with some policy
related considerations um for you all.
Obviously you guys are um very in the
weeds on this. So this is really just a
highlevel look at how we are approaching
the AI policy debate or how we look at
these issues. I think one of the the
first things to start with is um and one
of the things that makes the AI policy
um debate unique especially to things
like privacy and cyber security is that
in those instances you really are just
protecting from a harm being done.
Whereas with AI, yes, you have that
overlap with risk mitigation and
privacy, making sure that um you know
data is protected, but there is also
this other arm to it that you know these
tools do present this incredible
innovative potential. So how you thread
that needle um is is an important I
think way to to frame the the
conversation as opposed to just lumping
it in with privacy protections things
like that. The way we tend to um
approach uh the policy related
considerations as well we really um uh
take a tiered obligation approach when
it comes to risk. So uh you know
anything that has um that is making a
consequential decision things related to
hiring and um you know HR related
decisions um health care decisions uh
financial you know mortgage approval
rent approval those sorts of things that
have these huge implications for you
know really the rest of your life. um we
think that you know those all qualify as
high-risisk considerations and um should
be kind of the first targets for um any
sort of AI regulation or policy.
We also are pretty concerned about the
business impacts of policy
fragmentation. So one of the things that
we've seen is um you know in in the past
with previous policy debates is if
there's a regulatory environment created
that essentially only the biggest tech
companies can afford to comply with that
ultimately ends up starving out this
startup culture and reducing competition
on the developer end which then raises
prices on the deployer side of things.
So AI presents this really unique
opportunity for the retail sector that a
retailer of any size can use these types
of tools to scale their business. And um
if only the the biggest tech companies
can afford to to comply with a certain
policy reg regime or regulatory
environment, that's going to starve out
some of those um that competitiveness
within the tech sector and therefore
have trickle down effects on the
deployer side of things.
Now, um, as I mentioned, I also think
it's worth exploring existing
regulations, seeing where the holes are
in, um, or clarification is needed, um,
to highlight that existing regulations
do in fact carry over to the digital
space. I think without kind of going
through that exercise first, it becomes
very difficult to see where exactly we
need to to patch things. Um so my
understanding is that you know you all
are going through that process currently
and I really commend the work of of um
this body for for taking that investment
because I know it is um a difficult
undertaking to say the least.
Next up we um also feel strongly that
the responsibilities between developers
and deployers need to be very very
clear. Um the way we tend to think about
it is a substantial modification
standard. So if a a body that is
typically a deployer purchases a tool
and starts making substantial
modifications to it then um they're no
longer just a deployer. Right? At that
point you have kind of verged you know
uh bridged the gap into the developer
territory. Um but making sure that those
roles and responsibilities are clearly
defined in any legislation or regulation
um is is really important for for us. Um
obviously any policy um you know rule
making process right uh legislation
process is um you know can be lengthy
and and difficult. So in the meantime
encouraging voluntary standards um for
AI governance and risk management um is
another potential option to consider. Um
especially in an industry like retail
where like I said our business is really
based on consumer trust. we tend to see
pretty high adoption rates of voluntary
uh risk management standards within the
retail sector um because again we want
to show that good faith effort that um
you know we um uh we're we're complying
with these with these AI governance
standards and um this is something that
is the forefront of our mind and then
lastly um obviously as Mercy mentioned
retailers are a uh huge employer within
the economy so incentives for upskilling
and reskilling workers um is something
to consider as well. Um we saw some
interesting ideas come out of the AI um
action plan at the federal level uh back
in July in terms of some of the the tax
incentives for upskilling and
reskilling. Um and I think that's um
that could be something interesting to
to explore at the state level as well.
So
with that, um here are some links to
both the center, the work that we've
done um and uh the principles that we've
released and um uh I I'm happy to
circulate this this deck afterwards um
for for uh you know more in in more of
an in-depth view. So thank you so much.
>> Thank you very much for your
presentation and we do have a few uh
brief questions. So I'll start with
Representative Layman.
Yep. Thank you, Madame Chair, and uh
thank you to the presenters today. Um
one one topic I'd like to ask about. Um
I I don't think you really addressed was
this idea of dynamic pricing and or the
ability of retailers to change price
based on any number of factors. I does
the federation have guidance on this and
could you talk a little bit more which
of your members are using this? What
types of data are they using to inform
dynamic pricing? Um, could you just
address that a little bit more?
>> Yeah, happy to. Um, Mercy, are you are
you available?
>> Hi there. Sorry about that. I was trying
to get myself off of mute and off of
video. Um, thank you so much,
Representative Lamb, for that question.
Um, we can definitely explain to Diamond
C pricing. um our retailers are are not
um are obviously focused on uh um
consumer first. So the dynamic pricing
it goes with the preference of the
retailers. There's no uh specific um you
know targeting of of consumers based off
the pricing that they are. Um but we are
happy if you're if you're seeing use use
cases on that we're happy to take a look
at that.
>> Yeah, thank I I would appreciate some
followup and what are the use cases of
that? Thank you.
>> Any other questions? That was a good one
uh conversation and thank you very much
for your presentation. I think that
balance between freedom and innovation
and responsibility is one that we're
leaning into on the government side and
on the private side. So, we appreciate
you coming in sharing a few of your
thoughts.
>> Of course, and thank you again to the
task force for uh for the time and happy
to follow up with any additional
questions that that may pop up. uh over
email.
>> Thank you. Appreciate it.
>> Thank you.
>> All right. Next on our agenda is a
follow-up to the conversation we started
last month about energy policy and the
use of of data centers and how much
energy they consume. And so we have with
us today Bartley Cleland from strategic
initiatives at Net Choice. Welcome, sir.
If you'll just introduce yourself and
begin your presentation.
>> Absolutely. Uh thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, members of the committee. Uh
likewise, I'm sorry I can't I truly am
sorry I can't be there today. Um, as you
can see, I'm in a hotel room and it'd be
much more fun to be there with you guys
in in person. Um, I am Bartlett Clone.
I'm general counsel for Net Choice. We
are a trade association a little bit
different than most trade associations
that you you uh interact with or hear
about. We are a um uh organization that
comes from a point of principle. So we
we are dedicated to free enterprise and
free speech online and our members know
that as they join. So all of my uh
testimony should be uh seen through that
lens of free enterprise. And with that
let me try to go to slides and you will
see how technologically capable I am
which uh might prove to be not awesome.
Um
oh and I even practiced this and
I'm so sorry for taking your time while
I try to figure this out.
There we go.
Okay. Do you see my slide? Hopefully.
Okay, good deal. All right. Um, and I
these may have been circulated. Um, and
so you can follow right along. Um but
here we go. Same information I just gave
you. Um and I will go to the next.
There we go. So I want to talk a minute
about the demand for well actually let
me back up. So data centers as I I've
listened to some of the uh previous um
hearings and so understand a little bit
where you guys are. So I don't want to
spend a ton of time on things you
already know and already clearly
understand. So I'll just hit the
highlights, but AI uh doesn't run in a
magic place. It runs uh largely in data
centers. Um and data centers and the use
of AI generally of course takes
electricity. Um for those of you who are
uh let's say 30, 35 or older, you'll
remember in any office you worked in
that down the hall, there was a closet
and in that closet was a rack, a large
metal uh skeleton that had a bunch of
computers on it. And every now and then
an IT uh guy or gal would go in there,
do things, and your computer would work
better or worse depending on what they
did. Uh the the data center is a whole
bunch of those racks moved outside the
office. So gaining tons of efficiency,
uh lower cost for companies, um etc.,
etc., uh and actually a lot less u
electricity usage than if we all went
backwards 5 to 10 years and started
putting those exact same servers in our
individual closets in our individual
offices.
The demand as then you can understand is
merely for the cloud called cloud
computing and that is to say computation
that's happening over there um as
opposed to on my laptop um or on my
phone. Uh so there is no difference uh
between the cloud and essentially just
using your computer um as long as you
are actually doing the processing and
storage elsewhere. Obviously some
laptops, some phones have some capacity
to store and some capacity for compute
but a lot of what we do these days
happens elsewhere including presentation
we just heard of of any kind of retail
you are actually operating elsewhere um
with what you're buying uh credit cards
being uh approved etc. That is the the
visuals that you're getting uh the
computation for those visuals being
delivered to you on your phone. That's
exactly what's happening. it's being
delivered to you on your phone. You are
not going to it um as we kind of say in
uh language these days. So, uh what does
AI mean? So, we've had this uptick in
electricity usage for years and it has
been relatively steady u over 20 years
uh certainly in 10 years with the advent
of AI we see an increase of of what
compute uh will take for electricity. uh
that means that the trend line a static
trend line is now going to be a little
bit higher. Uh and that's before we get
to any new efficiencies and and etc. uh
however data uh I'm sorry electricity
usage has been a long-term trend for uh
for growth of the economy. Um and so
there are a lot of reasons to believe
and and to observe that electricity is
merely an input into uh economic
success. Along those lines, uh we've
heard uh from the national level that um
because AI requires higher amount of
electricity usage, even more data center
usage um that we should be investing um
in these areas. So in the infrastructure
in our country um and the one reason I
think there are a lot of reasons but one
reason that caught the attention in
Washington DC is not only so we can
increase our national productivity our
national output but also so that we can
beat China who uh as a country is very
much racing to beat us in the you the
development the deployment and use of
AI. Um and to do that they are also
building a lot of data centers because
they want them in their country.
All right. So, here uh is a
representation, a visual to show you why
the trend line has been increasing on
use of um electricity and use of data in
general. Here's a a typical set of apps
from a uh a phone. Uh if you pull out
your phone and look at all your apps,
every one of those apps takes
electricity to use. um you think of it
as battery usage, but of course you
charge that battery and that uh is
electricity. If you're doing this on a
pluggedin laptop, it's more obvious that
you're using electricity. Uh but in all
of these things, not only you're you're
driving events, you're driving the use
of software in a data center. The use of
that software of course requires
electricity to output your data. So this
is just the visual representation. um
heard a very funny question from one of
my colleagues to a group of legislators
recently. It was right after 4th of July
and he said, "All right, how many people
in here uh had a great Fourth of July,
all the hands go up. How many people
videotape those fireworks?" Tons of
hands go up because everyone's excited.
And he said, "All right, who are you,
who has ever watched previous fireworks
videos from former Fourth of July?"
Almost no hands go up. But how many
people shared it with, you know, their
family, friends? All these hands go up.
He's like, "Okay, every time you sent
that fireworks video, you have now made
another copy of it. And every time you
made a copy of it, it requires more data
which drives more electricity usage."
The whole point being it is us. It is
we, the citizens, we the the consumers
who are driving uh the the electricity,
the need for more electricity, the need
for more data.
All right, here's what I tried to
describe to you in words. This is the
inside of a data center. it just exactly
as exciting as you might imagine. A lot
of racks of computers. Um, mostly if you
do a data center tour, what you'll hear
about, frankly, is a lot about the uh
how they keep the place cool. Not as
much about the computers because it
really is just a bunch of computers, a
bunch of servers and racks and uh
different companies or different um uh
processes will be happening in different
racks. And you'll see people uh walking
around being IT people um who who
service these computers these and these
racks um in any number of ways.
Here's the outside visual u I'm
forgetting which data center this is.
This is one that's been built in three
phases. Each of these buildings is um
approximately the size of an aircraft
carrier um and filled with the picture
you saw formerly. So um each of these as
I talk about a data center and give you
statistics uh look at one of these like
this one in the middle um and and then
you can multiply those statistics by
depending how many phases are going on.
This one is in its third phase. Most of
my members build out uh four maybe five
phases which is why you will often hear
these citations for the amount of uh uh
acreage needed. It's not just for that
first building. It's also to anticipate
building um in the future. And so you
see here this this site's uh certainly
several hundred acres.
All right. So uh relevant to Kentucky,
relevant to today's conversation. Um how
how can we think of Kentucky becoming
the next uh data center hotspot or or
will it be? Um I'm a Midwesterner. I'm
actually from uh southern Illinois and
spent um any number of driving hours as
a teen headed to uh say Murray,
Kentucky. So I have um some
understanding of at least the east uh
sorry the western side of the state. Um,
but a lot of pride in the Midwest. And I
actually am a true believer. Um, and I
think the Midwest is perfectly uh suited
to to be a um a place where the next
wave of technological innovation
happens. Um, so I think California is
while very important um kind of
yesterday's technology, I think the
Midwest could be tomorrow's. So, and why
is that? um and and what do we think
about um as an industry and how can
Kentucky uh be one of these states that
benefits um where do and and I'm I
represent essentially hypers scale data
centers that is say billion dollar
investment um not collocations that I'm
sure you guys are familiar with and if
not we can get into that later uh but
where do these folks go so the most
obvious probably for virtually any
industry is a state that is once new
investment, tech jobs, um, and an
increase in property taxes. I lived in a
small town, um, and we had to pay out of
our pockets, um, as the town grew to
build new schools, new sewer, etc. Um,
and we just all but begged back then for
some kind of light industry to show up.
Um, it was always a challenge. This
would have been an answer to prayer,
honestly.
Next, um the the tax environment or I'll
call it the business environment to be a
little more broad. Uh but certainly the
taxes. Uh it's just worth noting that no
hypers scale data centers have located
in a state that imposes a sales tax on
servers and equipment. So if you think
back to that picture of being inside the
building, those servers, server blades
we refer to them as, uh get swapped out
about every four years. uh that may or
may not change with uh advancing
technology uh but it's not likely to
change by much and if anything it's only
likely to increase in speed. Why is
that? Uh to be competitive uh to deliver
to you what you need in the amount of
time that you're willing to wait for it
um and with all the right um
reliability.
So in a billion dollar data center
approximately half of that cost are
computers. So, you can imagine swapping
out $500 million in computers every four
years tends to be a little bit pricey.
Um, and so if there is a traditional
sales tax um on on those uh blades, it
racks up uh no pun intended cost pretty
quickly. Um instead, we see ourselves
and believe it is uh appropriate to
treat us like most states treat um
equipment um of sometimes it's
agriculture, manufacturing, etc. and not
apply sales tax when we're using it
internally as opposed to selling it
outside of our uh outside of our
companies. Oops. Next, we need available
land. Let's go back here. Available
land, as I mentioned, showed you the
picture. And then we love strong
community partners. Again, a little bit
like bullet number one, but folks who
actually want us there.
What does Kentucky gain when a data
center shows up? Well, obviously just
like with any kind of investment in uh
certainly in infrastructure investment
in your state, there's new activity,
economic activity that is spurred by
that. Um
my uh mega scale friends uh when they
build out data centers, they build out
their electricity connections and
substations. Uh that is not necessarily
true of everybody who says they're
building a data center. uh they can
speak for themselves, but for my folks
uh this is typical of what they do uh
for a lot of reasons, but not least of
which uh they're very concerned about
being uh good partners in a location.
They also bring jobs. Uh there's a lot
of numbers you'll see out there about
jobs. Um, and we can talk about this
more uh if you have questions and I'm
happy to get way more granular here, but
uh think about the folks who are walking
around inside that area I showed you who
are working on the computers about 100
new positions. Uh these positions pay
six figures. Um and they these are for
high school students um or people with
high school diplomas um or if you had
some trade school. Uh some of my members
will uh they have like eight uh 12 16
week training programs that they will
put people into to train them for these
jobs. As you can imagine, I grew up in a
very rural area. As you can imagine, a
rural area, a six-f figureure job um
means that uh you and you get to be home
every night. Um you have a different
standard of living than maybe most of
the folks who lived around or live
around you and you get to stay in your
hometown. uh which is to me amazing.
Finally, as one quick example, and I
will push all the bias here uh just to
the middle, Lowden County, which has
more data centers than anywhere else in
the world. Um so, uh but to give you a
number, um they started developing data
centers a decade ago. uh their property
tax revenue just this last uh so in 2024
was right at $900 million which of
course brings all the benefits that they
all know better than me and that is
keeping other taxes down um etc. Another
way to think about this 900 million is
it pays for most of their uh K12 in
Lowden County all from just from the
property tax just on data centers.
a quick two slides on uh economic
activity. Uh this is just as we call it
the here and not here analysis. So if
data centers are uh in your lo in your
state, in your county, in your uh uh
locality, uh here's what you get. You
see the the pluses. If they're not
there, these things just simply don't
happen. So uh it's a pretty simple
analysis. Why is it so simple? because
data centers in a lot of ways can be
located anywhere. Uh data centers don't
need to be in Kentucky to serve
Kuckians. They could be
literally anywhere. Um and so uh there
are reasons uh to want to attract data
centers because they could move sort of
anywhere. Uh but again I'll point out
the Midwest has a lot to offer um along
the lines of things that uh details
mentioned earlier that um mega scale
builders are looking for and then the
incremental tax revenue from data
centers. Uh just to point out uh the
various sorts of tax that um um are
still collected if if and when data
centers locate in your state or uh
counties.
And then just a couple uh quick things
to mention. Um and this one is right on
point to as you teed it up, Madam Chair.
Um what happens with electricity um and
the cost, etc. Um so what do Kuckians
not get? There's a ton of misinformation
um floating around and again I will
point out not least of which uh because
folks think of data centers all as one
um in one block industry and there are
different parts of the data center
industry. Um again I'm talking about
mega scale folks. Um and in this case
what is not happening is that
electricity bills for current
electricity customers they are it is not
increasing. Why is that? Um, and I won't
bother you with just reading these
bullet points, but let me highlight um
that my members are very interested in
being good corporate citizens and good
partners, good neighbors um as they
locate their data centers, as they
operate their data centers. Um, and this
middle bullet point might be a little
bit um, non-intuitive to folks, but as
large companies come in and guarantee a
purchase of long-term um, electricity
usage that actually works to to drive
down rates. Um, I don't pretend to be an
expert um, like the CEOs who run these
companies are. Um, so I've included some
quotes from them uh, to to bring their
testimony as it were into mine. Uh but
essentially if you think about a
business, if you have a a long-term
contracted stable partner, um it allows
you greater flexibility in other areas
of how you operate your business. That's
the economic fundamentals of why this
works. Uh this should be energy uh not
energy here down with uh uh Kansas
testimony. Um you see their their quote
and then let me go to the next slide.
So um you can see in Virginia where
they've had more experience than anybody
uh with data centers. You can see some
extensive quotes here with lots of great
stats uh from Bobble who is the Dominion
um CEO. So, um a utility who is pointing
out uh how they number one uh keep rates
um steady um if not uh drive down um and
then number two how much they appreciate
having these large uh companies there.
And then finally, just because why not,
uh last week in Pennsylvania, the
legislative hearing, uh Pennsylvania got
in on the act and uh pointed out that
these large large data centers, large
load, so mega scale um absorb a bunch of
the fixed cost. If you know anything on
the business side, you understand this
intuitively. Your larger customers
always absorb a larger amount of fixed
cost. Then finally, uh, some fascinating
new information or newish information.
Um, I'm always impressed by the
innovation that my members bring. Uh,
but, uh, a query, this was released by
Google just, um, a couple weeks ago. One
query, one AI query uses the the same
electricity as about 9 seconds of
watching television. 9 seconds. So,
think of Sunday football. You watch a
couple football games. how much
electricity has been used, that's a
whole lot of searches um that would have
been covered in that same time. So, uh
while yes, it uses electricity um we're
not talking
some hours and hours comparison to other
things we're doing in real life.
Similarly with water, uh data centers
have one of two ways to go about uh
cooling their systems.
um evaporative cooling or closed loop.
Um about if they're using uh evaporative
80% of the water is still there um and
can be returned to whatever municipal
system provided the water um and then
about 20% of the water evaporates.
What's that mean? Uh think about any
kind of open like if you have a swimming
pool or if you watch a swimming pool,
you have to refill it every now and
then. When you make coffee in the
morning, you've got the steam that comes
up your cup. Not every ounce of water
goes into that cup for your coffee. Um,
and so that's that's what we mean by
evaporative. Uh, again, interesting
comparison. I tried to pick a data
center close to y'all um that I had
stats for, but you see Montgomery
County, Tennessee. Uh, you see that
total gallons of water consumed in 2023
and you see that that was for the whole
year uh was as much as let's call it two
golf courses. Um so um again comparison
for what other industries are using and
how they're using the water and then um
the the additional I put in here again
Virginia that has tons of experience
here um this JARK review that most data
centers use about the same amount of
water um as an average office building.
So um they're as big as an office
building so maybe not too surprising
that that's what they use. Final slide
for me here um is the national um impact
and direction uh of why AI and then
hence data centers to power AI is
important. Um and there are a couple
different quotes here that I'm sure
y'all are familiar with. Um but from the
president uh President Trump and uh his
administration have very much made uh
beating China in this space a national
priority. Um and it you just walk the
cat backwards as I say uh AI goes back
to data centers goes back to energy. So
we have a little bit of a national
command uh to help meet these needs and
uh mega scale data centers hopefully are
very much part of the solution that uh
the president foresees in beating China.
And with that I'm happy to take any
questions y'all have.
>> Thank you so much for your
presentations. Very interesting. We do
have several who've signed up for
questions. We'll start with co-chair
Bray.
>> Thank you for your presentation. Um, how
familiar are you all with Kucky's energy
policies?
>> So, depending on who you mean by y'all,
um, I I hear your question. I'm not
going to be the expert on Kentucky
energy policy, but I'm happy to address
anything where that energy policy abuts
uh, data centers,
>> which is that that's great. Um, so
obviously, you know, we've got a finite
amount of generative capacity in
Kentucky. Um, we've had presentations
that it seems like the demand has vastly
outstripped our ability to supply power
to them. Um, have other states put in
programs to increase their generative
capacity? Um what can we do from your
all's opinion or or what have you seen
done to make sure that we've got enough
power to to f fuel the the demand on the
data centers but also make sure we've
got enough uh energy for other economic
development opportunities whether it's
manufacturing or um tech services or or
whatever.
Uh thank you very much for that question
and I actually love uh that your
question is coming from a place of I'll
call it optimism and how do we do this
not a we want to shut it down. That's u
that's awesome. So uh I what I've
observed and I have listened intently to
tons of testimony around the country at
this point. Um and again not being an
electricity expert um that there are
several pieces here. Um and I'll a
little bit walk backwards. So I think
everybody in the chain has a little bit
of responsibility here. Uh for example,
my folks are always looking, as you can
imagine, electricity is a huge part of
the input, right? Uh for costs and so
we're always looking for ways to become
more efficient. I think that is part of
the solution. Um and I do think that is
something to think about going forward.
Dynamic versus static analysis. Um
it it's hard to do dynamic analysis,
right? We don't know all the factors but
generally um as we look across history
uh electricity usage in any particular
thing has decreased even though our
overall demand has increased. So you
kind of ended up back in the same place
but maybe not as fixated on AI longer
term as we might be on whatever is next.
Um also uh usage for data centers uh
we're in the stack of big users of
electricity but we're merely in the
stack. I think the last thing I saw was
like we're number 12 and that's largely
behind lots of manufacturing. Um, which
begs your question, so how do we make
sure that Kentucky has enough
electricity for now and for the future
and for these other industries? Um, it
seems to me that there is a whole lot
that can be done should be done on how
quickly um new um productivity or
production of electricity can come
online. Um and it seems to be a large
problem and I realize that that is a
national as well as in some cases state
issue. Uh but I think there should be no
speed wasted in trying to address those
issues including transmission um so that
a data center um could be anywhere and
still get um electricity from anywhere
in the state. uh you know if there's if
there's land available in uh central
Kentucky and your greatest generation of
electricity is in uh eastern Kentucky um
the it it's a shame that transmission
might not be reliable enough to make it
to that data center so that both
companies can prosper. Last thing I'll
say is um the reality is and I you you
didn't exactly ask and I sounds like you
would u you get this but I just want to
underscore it. Um even data centers are
just like every other industry, right?
So they're not going to end up locating
someplace where there is not enough
electricity and generally for years out
when they're building these
billion-dollar buildings, they don't
intend to abandon them in in five years,
right? So they intend to be there for
the long haul. Um and so they need to
make sure that there's electricity for
the long haul. So your question gets
right at being a viable location uh for
data centers. Uh last thing I'll um as I
think about as I'll mention some people
have talked about loosening up their
policies to allow uh companies to I call
it bring your own electricity. Uh they
call it's called behind the meter. Um
and so uh it's not it it's not really
what my industry does. Um, but maybe it
incentivizes more innovation if you
allow folks uh to bring some of their
own uh uh electricity to the uh to the
dance, so to speak, um, and to run their
data center off of that. But I I think
there's probably dozens and dozens of
things to do. Um, and I would love to
follow up with you maybe with some of
some of these CEOs who we work with in
the utility space who would actually be
able to address that question much more
uh, pointedly.
>> Thank you. I I I do appreciate that. I I
I do think that we have an opportunity
if we can get the policy right to you
know if you can guarantee so much base
load usage
um you know obviously that eats into the
overhead of of operating a new facility
to generate power. Um, and it is kind of
counterintuitive because, you know, the
higher the demand, you would think the
higher the price. But it does seem like
there's an opportunity to stabilize
rates because of, you know, some of
these other higher usage. Um, but
anyway, thank you for your testimony and
I would love to hear from some of your
executives on the policy side of that.
>> And just so I can follow up with you,
I'm sorry, I can't you're really small
on my screen. Can you tell me who that
was? ask the question again and I'll
make sure to get in touch with you.
>> He's really small.
>> Yeah, not the not the tallest guy in the
world anyway. Um
>> Well, I didn't mean it that way.
>> No worries. But yeah, um Representative
Josh Bray, if you just want to um our
staff will get in touch with you and
exchange contact information on that.
So,
>> great. Thank you so much, sir.
>> Thank you. We have we have several uh
additional senators. Senator Williams.
>> Thank you very much. Uh, Madam Chair, I
so I want to f water is not a problem
for Kentucky. We got more miles of
navigable water than any other state but
Alaska. So water's great, but power I
think the enthusiasm here is that we
want to scale up for the power and we
just need to know how to do it. And we
have power here now in our coal
resources. We have power down in the
future with uh nuclear. We got uranium
stores reprocessing. We've heard energy.
So in terms of orders of magnitude is
really my question. Um we we've got the
current set of hyperscaling data centers
use a certain amount give us an order of
magnitude on that. We got the next
generation and I'm thinking about some
of these chipsets like if we start
building a data center now I'm presuming
they're probably looking at you know the
fineman chipsets from Nvidia. What's the
power density of that one that we're
gonna build two years? Actually, Fineman
is my favorite scientist. Uh he wrote a
book called Chaos Theory that everybody
ought to read. It's wonderful. We also
spent a bundle of money him find flying
first class New York to California
looking at clouds by which he solved the
problem of turbulence. Okay? Because
there's turbulence. Anyway, that's my
aside. And a lot of this water if it's
going up there it's going to become a
cloud right it doesn't go away we don't
destroy water but anyway give me uh the
question is about the order of magnitude
that we can expect if we're going to
start building data uh centers and
building uh power generation to match
those in the future.
>> All right I'm going to do my best to
answer that but then if if I'm off track
just please redirect me. Um so without a
doubt uh technology will continue to
advance and with that two things I
mentioned one so I won't really explain
that piece but on the one side we can
expect greater efficiencies so we can
anticipate that for the uh this is
Moore's law by the way I love that you
have a favorite scientist that's really
cool but as as uh if if we're familiar
with Moore's law uh and that is that
computing power doubles or the cost of
the same computer power gets cut in half
every 18 months that's roughly still
true. Um uh give or take a little bit of
the timing there and give or take a
little bit of the um uh monies there. Um
if that is still true, then we can
anticipate that about every 18 months we
will see a doubling of power. Uh that
has some argue that we're getting up
against the limits of that. Uh and yet
we are on the precipice and an area that
I love that's a whole different
conversation. We're on the precipice I
believe of mass quantum computing. Um,
and if we went to quantum computing, we
would have a we this would all be on
steroids. Uh, we'd use a lot more
electricity, but we'd have a lot more uh
data to help us solve some of these
electricity challenges. Um, as for the
output in the com, so there there's a
prediction both on the uh of the need
for more compute. Um, let me get back to
the technology we're talking about
today, which is AI. Uh but I've not seen
anything that has countered this
although it's a little hard at the
moment to um put a precise finger on it.
Um while a lot of this AI um usage is
new to us and new maybe in the
communications technology space. the use
of AI as the committee well knows going
back to neural networks and and and uh
originally called neural networks in the
50s and then machine learning um more
recently and now AI it's been going on
for literally decades and so we we can
anticipate the trend line will continue
but now with the public awareness
there'll be an uptick and that uptick
will come not necessarily in
communications use although that
certainly is true uh the uptick will
come in the fascinating uses We heard
one uh the retailers earlier. Um I
believe you've had uh healthcare experts
in already uh who have awesome stories
of AI use. Um and I now think that you
you can't actually uh in one of your
previous hearings someone said uh can
you tell me like uh somebody it may have
been you uh every bit of software now
has AI labeled on it and and I agree.
Uh, and if you walk through a trade show
of any sort, everything everyone's got
an AI like sticker up somewhere in their
booth. Um, I think everyone's looking
for how do they gain greater
efficiencies by baking AI into the cake.
All of that will they won't be searches.
Uh, but all of that AI use will drive
the need for more electricity as well.
So on both sides um I think you'll have
I see no reason to doubt that the
intensity of the data that we will need
will continue to increase. Um and there
I see no reason to doubt that because of
that the electricity we will need will
continue to increase. Uh the good news
is is if they start sighting a data
center today for example takes about
five years till it comes online. um in
those 5 years, technology will advance
that that I have no reason to doubt will
meet the needs of what is needed without
um really anticipating
more electricity usage per unit versus
per use generally. And we're uh most
companies are kind of used to that,
right? So it's the same as if you
suddenly have a new town pop up um and
or expand. I I I moved into a town in
Texas, 4,200 people. By the time I left,
eight years later, it was 42,000 people.
Um, obviously, utilities had to plan for
that for all that HVAC. Um, and so I
hope that answers your question that the
trend lines to me are pretty clear and
that we do need to be thinking about
what we're going to be using tomorrow,
but I don't think we're talking
magnitudes different um, as long as we
stay pretty true to the current trend
lines.
>> Okay. Um if I if I can follow up, Madam
Chair. Yeah. So
we in my district there's a 2.4 gawatt
power plant up there down here in Gent.
We have one user that uses about 430
megawws. Okay. Right next to them
there's another user that uses a good
bit of that too. A lot of that power is
consumed locally. So the the what I was
looking for is I've heard that the
current generation of data sitters are
like 200 to 400 megawws. Maybe the ones
we're starting to build are four 400 to
500 megawws which again doesn't scare
us. We got all sorts of industries that
do that scale. As you indicated, it's
not necessarily the largest, but the
ones down the road I've heard maybe a
gigawatt is what some of them may be. Is
is is that right? Do we need to be
planning for gigawatt multi-gawatt uh
power generation down the road?
>> I I think the answer is yes. And not to
be too glib, um I one of the biggest ch
and you guys know this again way more
than me because you run into it in a lot
more spaces than I do. We tend to have a
a a challenge of being very good at
planning for what we see in front of us
and not so good at guessing what we need
for tomorrow. And so a lot of
legislation, a lot of regulation
considers either what's right in front
of us or a static analysis. I think the
best legislation, the best planning does
skate to where the puck is going as
opposed to where the the puck is to
follow that analogy. Um and yes there is
every reason to believe that these data
centers um will become u stronger and
stronger so to speak meteor and meteor
over time because there's no reason um
to doubt otherwise given the continued
advance I mean we can talk about Nvidia
uh but there are all kinds of uh there
will be in fact there already are people
who are developing chips to compete
directly with Nvidia not least which is
in China uh but there are some here
domestically um and there's no reason to
believe that the uh the scale of what
they can do even within the same
physical area will increase over time.
So long answer to your to your question
but shortly answered. Yes, we need to be
planning uh because that is what we
already see coming.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you, Senator Thomas.
>> Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh and Mr.
Cleveland, I I enjoy your analysis and I
appreciate u
um the point she made today. I do have
this particular question for you though.
Okay. Uh you talked about Lowden County
and I've got a a lot of family in DC.
I've said this before and so I've been
up in Lowden County and that is just a
beautiful county. Very prosperous
um um uh very cutting edge. Just a just
a very beautiful county. But my feeling
is that the reason Lowden County has so
many data centers and it's such a big re
revenue producer is because of its
proximity to Washington Washington DC
and the federal government which
obviously is going to consume a lot of
data be because it is the federal
government. You also talked about
Montgomery County, Tennessee and and of
course being somewhat familiar with
Tennessee. Montgomery County, Tennessee,
for those who don't know, is located in
Clarksville, Tennessee, which is the
home of Fort Campbell, which is a major
military base here in the United States.
So, it's does seem to me that data data
centers are located in places where
there's a huge need for information
already. And if Kentucky were looking
and and I and I agree with the
sentiments of Representative Bray that
that that's a big issue that we've got
to address uh at the end of this year is
is where should we focus data centers
on. It would seem to me that data
centers in Kentucky are best used in
what we call the golden triangle, the
Cincinnati, Lexington, Louisville area.
That that's where they're best utilized.
Interesting enough, as I was listening
to Senator Williams comments, I said,
"That's the district that Senator
Williams represents. He represents the
Golden Triangle here in Kentucky." So,
so tell me if I'm right or wrong that uh
as we move forward uh in 2026 and
beyond, our first steps here in Kentucky
e should be to build data centers in
that area, the Golden Triangle area of
of Kentucky or maybe to complement
Montgomery County there in Christian
County or in Turk County, which are
counties that encompass um or are
contiguous to um Fort Campbell and Tri
County is very interesting because it
has a lot of water there
>> that we can use for energy. Your
comments, please.
>> Sure. Well, do I have to pick whether
you're right or wrong? Can I give you
partial credit?
>> You can say I'm wrong. I've been wrong
before.
>> No, you're not. You're not wrong, sir.
Sir, your analysis is right on um as far
as um who uses a lot of data. I mean,
that absolutely right. Um here's the the
missing piece um that I personally find
fascinating. I mentioned it briefly
earlier. we can talk about it more but
right now um and for the foreseeable
future latency is not an issue. So uh
where the data centers locate is is
largely irrelevant from the use of the
data. So um for example could uh could
um your counties be served from a data
center in Wisconsin? Sure. Yeah, that
wouldn't be a problem. um and it would
have no um no impact whatsoever on uh
that data used. Um we can imagine a
future where that might might change. Um
but right now um and for the civil
future that um that won't. So the the
actual situs of the data center near or
far from a um a military compound for
example or a um a hub of other activity.
um not that not that interesting uh for
when they're figuring out location when
my members are figuring out locations.
Uh one note on Len County uh the actual
reason uh that
without a doubt there's a lot of
government use of those data centers. No
doubt you're exactly right. One of the
more strategic reasons for why those
data centers were located there was the
location of May East. We're getting deep
into internet stuff here now, but um it
was the biggest uh forever, maybe still
the biggest hub for internet traffic uh
in the world. There's May East, there's
May West out in California. Um and so
when they were building those data
centers, you had a lot of the right uh
technological knowledge in the area uh
to build the the structures um as well
as then operate the data center. So
that's actually why um it grew. In fact,
um, one of our people who works with us
very closely, her name is Barbara
Commtock, former state rep and then
former congresswoman from Virginia.
She's actually known as the the
godmother of data centers, which I'm not
sure if that's a compliment or not. Uh,
but she is. And, uh, again, happy to
give you tons of information on why they
started in that area. Um, but she was
kind of the architect of why all that
all that began.
Thank you for that. Uh, Senator
Rawlings.
>> Thank you, Madam Chair. So, long-term,
how is a community benefited long-term?
You addressed the job creation, but I've
been told that once a data center is up
and running, very few people work there.
So, how would it how would the community
benefit? And is it true that it would be
just a very few people and operators can
work remotely?
Right. So, yeah, I've heard this
operator remotely thing a couple times.
Um, and and that's that's a mixed answer
on that. And let me do that one uh first
just because it's kind of the easiest.
Um it again depending on what kind of
office space you may have been in um in
the future or I'm sorry in the past or
how things are run in the capital there
uh there were times that the IT guy so
to speak um could log into your computer
could log into the server and make some
changes. But you probably also noticed
that the the server needed to be tended
to in in the physical space um uh often
and that is no different again now we're
just multiplying it by hundreds and
hundreds of servers located in one big
building. So it's no different um when
it comes to uh a data center. Uh it not
necessarily that every
issue that comes up has to be tended to
on site. Um but there are plenty of
things that do have to be tended to on
site. Hence you end up with the number
and it varies a little bit but not not
too much and if anything it varies a
little bit on the high side. I was
trying to be conservative and put in a
100 new jobs um that are think about
them as the actual data center employees
right so if Google owns the data center
they might be Google employees. Uh those
are the ones that to which I referred
six figure salaries um with the
education that I I talked about. There
are all kinds of other jobs u that come
with that. Um and I am not going to
remember I'll give you the general idea.
I've actually got stats on on this from
a couple different states where we've
done analysis. I'm not going to remember
those exactly, but you end up with a
couple hundred other jobs related to
security, uh outside physical
maintenance, um um vendors of various
sorts, etc. that are immediately
attached to that facility. So this is
not like the secondary economic impact.
This is primary. Um and then for
secondary, of course, you get all those
secondary demands. Here's what um
well, two different two different ways
to take this. I'm going to use Louisiana
first. Louisiana was very excited to get
a data center announcement in the
norththeast part of the state. Why was
that? Because they had a lot of land.
They didn't have a lot of people. um and
they didn't have a lot of economic
opportunities. So the governor was very
excited uh to get a data center uh
because to his point if they had
attracted um an automobile manufacturing
center, he wouldn't have had the people
in that part of the state to to take
those jobs um and it's not a
particularly economic prosperous part of
the state. So it wasn't an area that uh
normally could attract a lot of folks
anyway. Mo mostly people were moving out
of that. they would be born raised in a
town and move out of that part of the
state. Um so he sees this as a way to
drive the economy in that part of the
state with the right size industry for
the right sized area. So rural uh with
electricity uh with water um but not
with a lot of people. Another example is
in the southwestern
corner of Indiana. Uh the speaker
speaker Husten uh there is he's a better
salesperson on this stuff than I am. Uh
he will tell you a story about getting
data centers located in that area and
watching the economy boom from like
circular economic uh growth. So the data
center goes there that then starts
training folks who understand it. Uh so
other companies move in because there's
an educated workforce at some level or
they want to be close to a data center
for their own purposes for whatever
their businesses are. Um and that area
has grown. It I believe he told me it
was the biggest growth area in the state
of Indiana. So a couple different ways
to look at it. I don't know that a data
center makes a lot of sense in some
places, right? High land cost, uh
crowded areas. I don't know if that if
that makes sense, but I do know in some
areas uh Kentucky could see a real
opportunity. And think of those two
slides I showed you, the here and not
here. Um
I this is just me personally. I I think
it would have been pretty cool to have
had some kind of opportunity like this
when I was growing up in a rural
community. Um and an opportunity to stay
living at home perhaps. I never really
had an opportunity to think those that
way unless I wanted to be a farmer. Um,
and so the the hundred jobs is better
than the zero jobs, right? Um, and so
that's the way I tend to think of these
opportunities.
>> Okay. All right. Thank you.
>> Thank you. And we do have a few other
people who signed up for questions. So
if you could just be briefing your
questions and briefing your answers, I
would appreciate it as we have a good
agenda still to go. So Representative
Layman.
>> Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um I quick
question and I know I look I understand
the current need for additional data
centers. I mean how do I I'm trying to
put this in I mean at some point we're
going to get a lot more efficient about
data. I mean most of these data centers
most of what they store is garbage. Um I
think as you mentioned with the firework
you know a thousand firework videos and
stuff like that. I mean at some point as
we get more efficient AI helps us to
make better use of data centers is there
a time that we have to plan for like end
of life of these big facilities and what
does that look like and do your members
think about this I mean we're talking
about I don't know again 10 20 30 years
very large buildings with lots of
electronic components does this become
brownfields or is there some plan for
how to redevelop this or appropriately
handle when when these things close. So
appreciate some thoughts on that.
>> Sure. So let me separate out two things.
I think what you're asking about is the
physical plant uh versus say the server
blades. Server blades I mentioned
earlier every four years or so those get
replaced. So um
assuming uh an infrastructure of
computing that looks a lot like what
we've always had uh you would assume in
the future that you could update those
buildings uh very quickly about every
four years with replacing the server
blades. Um the rest would be typical of
any large I mean these bu in some ways
these buildings are not that
interesting. In some ways they're
fascinating. Uh but they're large metal
buildings. Um, and so you'd have the
same kind of end of life issue of a
large metal building with a concrete
slab. Um, often with often with uh
conduits built under the concrete so
that they can run data and electricity
lines. Uh, but that's it. So there's
nothing particularly special about that
as compared to farm buildings for
example.
>> Thank you, Representative Lewis.
>> Thank you, Madam Chair. Brief uh comment
then a question. Um, in contrast to
Senator Thomas, I I think it's important
when we're looking at policy that we're
looking at, uh, what's needed. So, we
talked about power generation, we talked
about power capacity, we talked about
water use. Obviously, Kentucky has
plenty of water. If you go to my neck of
the woods in East Kentucky, we've built
out massive grids where the coal mines
used to operate. And I think we have the
capacity. The issue that we run into
though is the generation side. So, we're
looking at base load generation. So,
whether that's nuclear, whether that's
uh coal, maybe over in Owensboroough, I
don't know. But uh I think it's mindful
that that we we look at what we have and
in the case where I'm at, you know, I've
got a power company that's looking at
15sec
on. So if like you in your presentation,
you mentioned um you know, if we could
absorb those fixed costs and make it
easier on our residents, I I think
that's a win. Uh going into the comment,
co-chair Bray took my question, but in
in the explanation on that, you
mentioned uh power generation behind the
meter, so to speak. So, number one, what
does that look like? And number two,
what does the regulations behind that
look like?
>> So, really good question on both. I
think those are both to be determined.
Um, best I understand. Again, not an
electricity expert, especially when it
comes to the federal regulations. Um but
what would it look like from where my
members would be concerned uh be the
opportunity if they wanted to take it
and I think that's an open question of
uh providing their own electricity
um generation at the site um there's a
lot of talk you guys have probably heard
this about modular nuclear reactors um
th those are not for today um they they
could very well be 5 years I think I've
seen some predictions for 5 to 10 years
um and that could very well be uh but if
And when that happens, uh you could
imagine
uh them pulling up a tractor trailer
size um reactor and parking it next to
the facility and running their facility
off a couple of those. Um I can't
remember what the capacities for some of
these are. Um but that that's kind of
what it would honestly what it would
look like I think in the longer term.
Shorter term, I can tell you that Kansas
is exploring uh whether uh they would
allow um uh not Kansas, I'm sorry,
Nebraska is exploring whether they would
allow some behind the meter uh
particularly if there were alternative
fuels like ethanol um used and what that
would look like. So, but I've not been
far down this conversation yet because
it's not been a primary conversation to
be honest with you. about six months ago
uh we were arguing about whether data
centers should exist at all and so it's
been a whole new world of happiness to
see people trying to figure out how do
we get more and how do we generate more
electricity because I think listen data
centers or not we're we need more
electricity data centers just happen to
be the focus but we're going to use more
so I think these are the right questions
um I just not sure I have a ton of data
for you yet because we're just not that
far down that
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
>> Thank you. Uh, Represent Senator
Williams, did you have a last comment?
>> Yeah, I really not for just a little bit
of clarification on my district.
Louisville election in Northern Kentucky
is where the Golden Triangle activity.
Uh, Gallton, Carol, Owen, and even
Franklin 100 jobs would be a major
economic positive impact for those
areas. And they would want me to say
they would like to see those 1006 figure
jobs. So, that's bulk of my district. I
think you could take every one of us up
here and say we'd be we'd be for those
jobs. Thank you. Thank you very much for
your presentation discussion. I really
appreciate it very much.
>> Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh if you need
any followup, obviously have your staff
reach out. More than happy to help you.
But it's been my honor to be here. Thank
you.
>> Thank you. We'll do. All right. Next on
our agenda, I'm very excited to have um
members from University of Kentucky come
talk about some of the exciting work
they're doing, not just at the
university, but through healthcare. And
so welcome both of you to the the table.
Glad to have you both with us today. If
you want to introduce yourselves and
then you can start your presentation.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Thank you so much technology. Uh I uh my
name is Thomas. I'm an AI research
fellow at the National Board of Medical
Education. Uh this is Hubie Ballard.
He's my partner in all of this. Uh we
know that your time is super valuable
and we're running short. So, I'm going
to be a little bit quicker as we walk
through some of the things, but we are
so grateful. Thank you all so much for
for your invitation and letting us talk
to you about the things that we're doing
at UK. Uh, I it is it has never been
more exciting and dynamic and we are all
leaning into AI just like you all are as
we're trying to figure out how do we
integrate this into the way that we
teach, the way that we learn, the way
that we train the workforce of Kentucky.
uh and uh so I am teaching a course uh
in October so up one month from now uh
about the fundamentals of artificial
intelligence and the idea is that we
expect that every single one of our
students who walks through the door is
going to be touching AI in some way
right whether that is science in
medicine and technology uh every single
one of them are going to need to
understand the fundamentals of how to
use it um this is a logo that I created
for that uh course uh I created it on my
own it would took me about an hour and a
And you think about this kind of
technology and power behind every single
student, behind every single project
that they work on, all the companies
that they're going to build. Um, we
expect that it is our responsibility to
train those students to make sure that
they understand the fundamental concepts
and we're starting that with tech 100.
So this is that course. Uh, we call it
collaborative intelligence. It's
understanding and using modern AI. Uh
and the idea is that we want to inspire
students to be active users of
artificial intelligence, not just
designing models and things like that,
but using it for their their life, their
workforce, their the way that they
learn. Uh and so it's a 10m module
course that builds on hands-on
activities that starts with just basic
prompt engineering through agent design
and then finally by the end of it
they're doing things that with AI that
they couldn't otherwise do without it.
Um the uh final proposal is a proposal
where they want to use AI to solve some
problem in a community that they care
about. Whether that is their hometown,
whether that's Kentucky as a whole,
whether that's their dodgeball team. Uh
the expectation is that they use their
no code techniques to figure out how can
they make their community better. Uh
this is Katie Thompson. She is my
co-lead in this course and she's also
the founder and the principal
investigator of the AI machine learning
hub. uh this is the connective tissue at
UK that brings people together. Uh we
are uh pediatricians, we're physicians
uh and she is a statistician and the
projects that we're working on need
people from all over campus in order to
lean into this technology because we
know what we know, she knows what she
knows and boy bringing these people
together is really where the power of
the university network comes from. uh in
her hub she has 350 people from across
campus from 11 different colleges. She
can rattle off the numbers better than I
can but the short story is that we are
having symposiums and having
conversations just like this as we try
to figure out what are the problems that
we can solve with the technology that
already exists. On the right side of the
screen there is a picture of some grass.
Um, this was a student project where
they're using a machine learning
computer vision model where they take
pictures of grass to identify grass that
is toxic to pregnant horses. Uh, and
that is super cool and it's just one of
the many things that they are working
on. Um, thinking about not just students
but our faculty. Uh, this is Trey
Katzer. He's our assistant provost for
teaching and learning and runs our SELt
which is the enhancement in learning and
teaching. Uh the short story is that it
fell to him to figure out how to use
artificial intelligence in our teaching.
And when everyone else across the
country at universities were saying that
AI is going to make students cheat and
we don't know how to grade them anymore
because they're writing essays using
chatbt, he was figuring out the
fundamentals of how to integrate AI into
the way that we teach and assess our
students. Uh and so he is running
workshops and events on AI skills and
ethics and tools and applications. Um
and he is not just a resource for us at
the university. He's become a resource
uh at the state uh and at the national
level. Uh moving in talking about kind
of the national level, I wanted to talk
quickly about our center for
computational sciences. Uh and so this
is Jim Griffin. He's in charge of our
CCS in Vicram Gazula. Um to make a long
story short, they're doing a whole lot
of things including workshops and
trainings. uh but specifically they are
providing national scale AI support and
tools for the National Science
Foundation. So they the the NSF has an
access supercomputing program that just
launched and every single question from
researchers around the country whether
you're at MIT or Stanford. Every single
one of those questions gets routed
through Lexington and answered by our
team here and then routed back because
we're using language models uh and it's
powering the underlying research that is
going into artificial intelligence
around the country. They also have two
other projects that I'm not super
familiar with because because I to be
honest with you, it's a little bit above
my head. Uh but one of them is with the
uh National Artificial Intelligence
Research Resource Pilot Program that was
one of the White House's new AI action
plan agendas. Uh they are one of I think
six or eight partner uh we are one of
six or eight partner institutions uh
that are providing services for that
one. Uh, and then there's another one
that I just truly don't understand
because it's above my head. Uh, but
thinking about going from kind of the
above my head to to the to the ground
level, how can we improve the lives of
Kuckians? I wanted to to tell you about
Jay Miller. Um, so he is the dean of the
college of social work and he is already
well known for using technology in
social work and pushing the limits of
how we're using virtual reality and
artificial intelligence. That's an
article in Fortune magazine from 2023.
uh but he has built tools that not just
connect patients with resources but also
uh foster care children. There's a whole
bunch of tools that if I had maybe a
couple more hours I could tell you about
all the things that he's doing but he is
not just using AI to make his work and
his social workers more effective but
also on the back end he's doing a whole
bunch of the administrative things that
you keep hearing about where people are
saying that it's going to streamline
something. He's doing budget
reconciliations. He's doing all sorts of
things that uh that are the promise of
AI, but he's leaning into them and
investing the time and the effort into
making sure that every single one of the
social worker students that pass through
his college are equipped with the
ability to use these things to make
themselves more effective and efficient
so that we don't so that those social
workers can have more impact on the
ground talking to families instead of
spending time in their offices filling
out paperwork. Um and then so going from
the college of social work to now to
design. Uh this is Joe Brewer. He's the
de director of technology at the UK
College of Design. Um this is the
college that houses architecture and
interior design, some landscape
architecture and things like that. Um
the he is doing some incredible stuff on
both the education and just where they
work. That is the the gray design
building that was just very briefly
shown. Um they has thousands of sensors
uh for their HVAC system. um he's got
something like 80 geothermal wells in
the parking lot and all of these things
are connected by AI in order to make us
more efficient and effective. So over
the two months over the summertime when
nobody was going through the the classes
because they were on summer break um
some of those classrooms got up to 110
degrees because they weren't detecting
people and so they weren't chilling the
offices. Uh and that's the kind of
efficiency that we can gain using a
little bit more data. Um similarly those
uh those fabrication labs that he showed
at the very beginning some of those
plants um use artificial intelligence to
model the structures that students are
making. you know, when you make whether
it is an architectural design for a
building or you're designing a shoe, um
when you're designing them in your
basement, in your classroom, uh there
are a lot of little subtleties that you
don't realize in three dimension until
you actually produce it with a
fabrication plant. And so they're using
AI to model those things. So they're not
printing the first draft, they're
printing the fourth or the fifth draft.
And that way we're saving time, we're
becoming more efficient, and that way
we're making actually better products.
Uh this is a slide from Cody
Bombgartner. He is our director for
center for applied AI. He is a friend of
this committee. Um he wanted to us to
highlight the change over time over the
past year uh of work that they've been
doing. Um this very impressive pie chart
on the right side uh gives me a glimpse
into the number of people and the number
of organizations and committees that his
group is touching. He's going all across
the campus because it represents every
single one of those slices represents
somebody who is interested in using
artificial intelligence to expand
whatever work they're doing whether
that's in medicine whether that's in
libraries or whether that is in whatever
their their study of discipline is. Um
this is just one of those examples. This
is aggreg um so this was a partnership
between the center for applied AI and
the college of agriculture food and
environment. The the short story is that
they have trained and fine-tuned a
language model just based on Kentucky
data, Kentucky research about Kentucky
farmlands. Uh, and they have essentially
given it away. Um, there's a website
that you can go and you can ask it
questions. Uh, my sister had a fungus
growing in one of her plants. Uh, and we
thought we needed to get rid of it. We
asked Aggreg and it turns out this is a
friendly fungus. Uh but any person can
go on there and talk about invasive
species and fertilizers and uh
strategies and soil testing and those
kinds of things. Uh it's really cool
stuff. Um and and I wish we had more
time to to tell you about it.
But we think that this is where the
rubber hits the road. Um so these are
the students. So HuB a couple of years
ago started the Innovators in Medicine
Club. Um this is a group of now 265
people from across campus who are all
focused on solving problems in
healthcare using technology and
artificial intelligence. That top
picture was from our meeting back in at
the end of August. So this was just a
couple of weeks ago. Um the short story
are is that these are the students who
are leaning into AI. They are hungry for
it. And and this pocket of students is
just in healthcare and medicine, but
we're building innovators in all
disciplines, whether that's fine arts or
communication, whatever it is, where
students want to get together and share
ideas and technology and design
solutions to problems that otherwise
couldn't be solved. Uh the when you
think about chat GBT for us is like
brand new technology, right? We barely
understand it. But for these students,
some of them, they've had it for the for
three years now. They've had it the
majority of their high school time. And
so now they're walking onto campus and
they're expecting to learn what is the
next step. How do I use this technology
to make the next Amazon, to make the
next Facebook? You know, Mark Zuckerberg
and Jeff Bezos were their age when they
started those companies. And now we
think that with this technology they can
take it so much further because you
don't you you you you essentially have
in your pocket somebody who can give you
feedback and recommendations and nudges
and oh did you know that they were
already doing this this way in Kansas or
whatever. Uh and and so we think that
the students is is really going to be
the lifeblood of this because we also
know that at the University of Kentucky
the majority of our students stay in
Kentucky, right? And so we have the
expectation that that we feel the
obligation to train up the workforce of
Kentucky so that they can use artificial
intelligence. And so this is why we're
leaning in.
This is one of their projects. Um so
this was put together by Hunter Coulson
and Matthew Bernard. Um they are we've a
lot of people have talked about how AI
and personalized tutors is going to
change the way that we learn, right? Um,
and what they found in real life that a
small subset of students in the medical
school could use that technology well.
If you had a background in engineering
or computer science, this was awesome
and it blew the doors off of how how you
learn. Uh, but for the rest of us, we
weren't using it as much. Uh, and so
they built this system. We call it the
Socratic Tutor. It's a personalized
precision education platform that keeps
track of every single question that you
ask, every single question that you miss
on the questions that it generates. Uh,
and it tracks your your your development
over the course of the entire medical
school career. Um, similarly, from an
administrator's perspective, we're able
to train our course material, our
specific UK course material, that was a
PowerPoint from one of ours, uh, our
specific UK course material on there to
map our curriculum so we understand
where students are starting to lag
behind. We can pick up when students are
starting to fail earlier. And this
technology is mind-blowing and they're
giving it away to all the students at
the College of Medicine. It's not like
they're looking to make a buck off of
this, right? We are putting together a
study with the faculty where we are
looking to see whether or not deploying
this for every student does that change
your board exam scores. You know, does
that decrease the amount of time that
you need to study because it makes you
more efficient.
Uh this is Brent Harrison. He's at the
uh director of undergraduate studies in
computer science. Um he is the one of
the the people putting together the new
bachelors in artificial intelligence.
So, if you if all you want to do is
learn about how I can use AI and that is
what your goal is coming into college,
um he's the guy for you. Um he also is
offering a new certificate for people
outside of CS. Let's say you're a
communications major but want to make an
effort to integrate AI more and get
recognition from the workforce that you
have this extra training. That's what
that certificate is for. He's also doing
a lot more courses on things that I
still am working on understanding like
machine learning and and building those
models. Uh if you if anyone is
interested this is just a quick personal
story. Um so this is GBE. Uh she
essentially is using artificial
intelligence in looking at EEGs to
understand where in the brain people who
have epilepsy have disease. Uh it's
incredible stuff. I I find it super
fascinating. And the only reason I know
about her work uh is because our kids
are friends at daycare. uh and it and it
it kind of represents the the vast
number of people who are working on AI
in all kinds of different ways and we as
a university are working to try to bring
that all of these people under one
umbrella so that if if I am designing a
chatbot to teach students how to deliver
bad news about a patient's child or
something like that then maybe the law
school can take that exact same
technology change it a little bit for
cross- examinations we are working on a
way to centralize all of those things
and we're hoping to have more about that
soon.
But all of this, everything that we've
been talking about is essentially
working towards making lives better in
Kentucky. That's the underlying goal for
all of this. Huie and I represent a
group of a growing group of physicians
who believe that artificial intelligence
can improve patient outcomes, can
improve the physician shortage in
Kentucky, can improve access to Eastern
Kentucky, can make health care more
efficient, more effective. We can we can
be better. We can be better because now
we have technology that didn't exist 10
years ago and it's up to us to figure
out how to deploy that across the state.
One quick example is we think about
sepsis. Sepsis is a killer all around
the world, right? A lot of people die of
sepsis. In Kentucky in 2023, there were
37,000 patients who were admitted to
hospitals
because of sepsis. That's all hospitals,
not just at UK. Uh of those 37,000, it
attributed $2.4 4 billion worth of cost
uh to insurance companies and 81% of
those students students 81% of those
patients with sepsis were covered by
Medicare or Medicaid and so we
understand the vast responsibility that
we have to be a little bit more
efficient to be more effective and when
you think about sepsis every single hour
that goes by without diagnosing and
treating somebody for sepsis the risk of
mortality increases by 9%. So, this
isn't just a number of dollars. This is
real people's lives. And what if we had
an AI system in the background looking
at every single one of your vital signs,
all of the your inputs, your outputs,
your allergies. Does it know that you
had colon cancer? Did it know that you
have chemotherapy? It looks at the
demographics of all of the people who
are similar to you to identify the
people who are going to become septic a
little bit earlier. Even if it was just
1 hour earlier, that would be a
substantial difference. And what if we
had a system like that? And the reality
is we do. We have that AI system and we
initially took one of the off-the-shelf
Epic models and deployed it at the
hospital and it didn't work. And we were
pretty bummed about it because we
thought we could get away easy. Uh but
it didn't work. And it didn't work
because Kentucky is different. It's
Kentucky is different from California
and New York and the patients are
different from Brazil and London. And
the model is built on 400 million
patients all across the world. And what
we needed was we needed a model built on
Kentucky patients with Kentucky data
with Kentucky problems. And so we built
that. We didn't build that. The the
people at UK healthcare built that. Uh
but they built essent they built and
trained a model based on the healthcare
data that they had. And it's not
perfect. It's better, but it's it's not
perfect, but it's getting better every
single year because we're getting more
data and we're understanding how the
model works. and we're able to change
the weights and we're able to get more
fine-tuned, better quality data. Now, we
have these microphones that listen to
every single conversation. And we're
using it right now for to make uh
documentation a little bit easier so
that physicians can have more
face-toface time. But what if we took
that exact same data and we used it to
identify how do Kentucky people talk
about Kentucky problems? The the
vernacular that we use is different from
anywhere else. and can we figure out
ways that we can link that the the words
that we use in Kentucky to the diseases
that affect Kentucky. Those are the
kinds of things that we think when we
think about the future of healthcare. We
think about precision medicine. We don't
think about taking the models that
everyone else is using everywhere else.
We think about using models that we
build ourselves for us because we I was
born here. I grew up here. My son is you
saw him, right? These are the tools that
are going to affect our lives just as
much as everyone else across the state.
And so there there are three projects
that we the the Cabinet for Health and
Family Services has a state university
partnership where every three years you
can propose getting access to state
data, super valuable data. And just a
quick um blurb for them, the Kentucky
healthcare data is actually really good.
And it's something that I don't think we
recognize or talk about a lot, but when
you talk to Massachusetts in New York
about how long does it take for you to
get and use data from a state
perspective, it takes 18 to 24 months.
Here it takes like 6 months. That's you
all did that and and so thank you so
much. And now it's up to us to figure
out how do we use that data to make
healthcare better. Uh and so we we put
together three proposals. Um the first
one is to try to figure out how do we
decrease the risk of readmission for
patients with congestive heart failure.
Um this is a ser heart failure is a
serious disease that affects a lot of
people in Kentucky. Uh and it is a very
expensive admission because patients
will often be admitted for days if not
weeks at a time as their heart improves.
And so what we want to do is we want to
get a hold of Medicaid claims data and
combine it with our UK healthcare data
to to design a predictive model to
identify patients who are at very high
risk of coming back into the hospital
and intervening on those patients and in
figuring out how do we be more tailored
and more precise with our education. How
do we, you know, have like a step down
clinic? Do we visit them at their homes
in order to make sure that they don't
bounce back to the hospital? Um that's
just one uh of the projects. This is
part of the advancing Kentucky uh
together network. Um which is a
strategic initiative that essentially
looks at how can the university work on
these four pillars to make life in
Kentucky a little bit better. And the
the places that that we're focusing on
for this are healthcare, education, the
workforce, and just the community at
large. And we're convinced that AI is
going to play into every single one of
those pillars.
The second project is for hepatitis C,
medication compliance. Hepatiti, we
cured hepatitis C. We didn't uh but but
people have cured hepatitis C. It is 98%
curable if you take your medicines the
right way. And there are populations in
Kentucky who have hepatitis C that we
have data on that our curate is about
60%. Because people just don't take
their medicine. And so can we use AI to
get people to take their medicine
better? And this is the details for it,
but the short story is that this
technology exists. There are smart pill
bottles that every time you pop the top,
it sends out a cellular signal. We're
working on building an AI system that
every night at 9:00 p.m. it scrolls
through the list of patients who haven't
popped the top on their bottle. Uh, and
then another AI system that just gives
them a nudge. Whether that is a text
message, a phone call that just says,
"Hey, I know you're busy. Don't forget
to take your meds tonight." That's it.
Maybe that works, maybe it doesn't. If
it doesn't work, great. We'll try
something else. But if it does, then
that decreases cerosis in Kentucky,
liver cancer in Kentucky. a communicable
disease, right? And and it's the
software itself is is simple. It's
basic. We could probably write it in a
couple of weeks. We're already working
on it. Uh and we have a pretty good
working prototype. If only we had a
little bit more access to data, which is
which thank goodness for for the for the
cabinet getting us some of that data.
The final one is essentially cancer
screening. Um what the proposal here is
can we get a hold of Medicaid claims
data identify patients who are eligible
for screenings whether it's colon cancer
lung cancer cervical cancer finding
those patients and then deploying that
similar software to reach out to them
and then can we take it a little bit
further this is a stretch on us can we
take it a little bit further integrate
this AI system into our epic scheduling
system so that you're just going about
your day you get this phone call you
learn that oh I am due for colon cancer
screening what is colon cancer Why am I
at risk for this? What are the side
effects? Okay, great. I want to get this
colonoscopy. How do I do that? And we
think that we can design an AI agent
that walks you through the process and
schedules you for your appointment all
at the same time so that you don't then
have to take the onus on yourself of
calling your doctor and trying to get a
colonoscopy. That we can just do it
automatically, bring you in, and make
sure that we are caring for the people
of Kentucky.
This was kind of a lot of stuff because
I know that that we were running over um
but but we do think that this is the
most important part of our presentation
is this conversation back and forth. We
hope that this is kind of the beginning
of of a conversation because we have a
lot of ideas. We've got a stack of about
32 pages worth of proposals that we want
to do. Uh and but we want to understand
where the state thinks that we should be
putting our time and attention. We've
got dozens of students who are champing
at the bit to make the next big thing to
to do something impressive to change the
lives of the people in their hometowns.
Um, and so we we want to know what's
interesting to you. Um, again, thank you
all so much for your time and for
allowing us to come and present today.
>> Oh, Dr. Tom, I could give you a couple
hours and I would sit here, I think most
of us would, and and just listen. Um,
and we've so enjoyed just listening to
the last couple months of what you all
are doing at UK. And I think what you've
articulated there is what gets me most
excited, I think, about AI and
healthcare, which is changing the lives
of Kuckians and moving the needle past
just are we talking about diagnosis, are
we talking about spending money, are we
getting people to the hospital, that's
great. But if we're not changing their
life and moving them to being actually
better in health, we're not really
moving the needle. Um, so I'm really
excited about some of the things you're
talking about. I can't wait to read all
the proposals. Um, does anybody have any
specific I'm sorry, uh, Representative
Miles, we'll start with you.
>> Hello.
Um, thank you, Chairman. And this is not
the first time that um, we have
encountered Dr. Tay. So, thank you so
much for your presentation today, but
um, I'm really curious what Dr. Ballard,
I don't know if you all rolled over here
together, but what type of conversation
takes place in the car with Dr. going
somewhere because I mean I quite frankly
I' I would rather see you than a play or
a dramatic theater whatever because so
much information but um so fascinating
so excited to see what's next and and
what you all have to bring to us but
what type of conversation takes place in
the car with him?
>> Uh Representative Miles, uh thank you
for the question. Uh it's kind of it's
kind of akin to the guy that rides
around with Superman and gets his cape
ready and stuff. That's what I would
tell. No, in all sincerity, we're
actually talking about uh power usage of
data centers the entire way over here
and stuff. And I I would so this is
regarding uh Mr. Cleland's talk. You
know, I would actually give you the
analogy that when you look at the data
centers that if you look at the Nvidia
chips, the uh DGX chip, which has eight
uh graphics processing units, and I was
an electro engineer before I went to
medical school, by the way, and so um if
you look at one of those chips, it uses
about the same amount of power as around
8 to 10 households in a year. And those
data centers have, you know, anywhere
from 20 to 50,000, you know, large data
centers have 100 thousands of those, you
know, those servers in them and stuff.
So it's equivalent to a small city and
stuff with 200,000 people in them and
stuff is is then. So that's what we were
talking about on the way over here is
the answer to your question. So
>> thank you for being in Kentucky, both of
you. Thank you for being here,
>> Coach Bray.
Thank you. Um, always feel like a
toddler after I listen to you all talk.
Um, so thanks for that. Um,
very impressed with everything you're
doing and so super excited that it's
it's not only happening, you know,
happening at all, but it's happening
here in Kentucky. Um, you know, you
asked for our feedback on what what you
all need to be focusing on. I mean, it
sounds like you're doing an excellent
job without our feedback because
everything you you've talked about
extremely important and and if you get
it right or let me rephrase that, when
you get it right, it's going to save the
state a ton of money just through the
Medicaid system. And so, we're extremely
fortunate that you all are have taken
the onus upon yourself to do the
research. I guess my question to you is
because you're the experts in all of
this. I mean, I'm like a, like I said,
like a toddler up here. What do we need
to be focused on? What What can we do to
help you all? What can where can we go?
What do we need to be looking at?
Because you're the boots on the ground.
You see this, you you're you're training
the students. You've got the the
feedback from the people that are that
are developing the systems and you know
what direction it's going better than we
do. I mean, I would love to just hear
any advice or where do we need to be
looking or how can we help?
>> Uh, so Thomas said this a couple times
during his presentation. Uh, in our
space, it's all about so uh,
Representative Bra, thank you for the
question. So, the answer is it's all
about access to data. And so for uh for
all of these different models that are
decreasing you know readmission to the
hospital for heart failure recognizing
sepsis that you know people are using in
California and you know that are is
saving money they have access to good
data and you know and Tama pointed out
the importance of in Kentucky we need
Kucky's data regarding you look at
Medicine Medicaid claims you look at the
vaccine registry
those types of things. That's how we can
make a difference because for our models
to work, we need access. We Katie
Thompson is an expert in data lakes is
what I would term it in terms of large
data sets and in putting them into the
software that does the machine learning
and helps improve and recognize, you
know, the patients that we can most
benefit. And for for us, it's access to
data. And I think you know the next
question should be um you know how do we
access that data and maintain security?
You know we're both physicians. We know
a lot about HIPPA and so uh you know
making sure uh so part of what we're
doing is within EPIC. Epic the
environment is very secure. It's well
beyond what's needed for HIPPA uh
compliance. And the other thing for uh
Dr. Thompson Katie um you know she has
her own HIPPA uh protected servers that
she utilizes for the data. She's
actually utilize Medicaid data
previously uh from the cabinet for uh
and so you know this is uh you know
that's that's the next steps.
>> So just if I may follow up um your all's
access to data you said it takes about
six months and that's a lot better than
other states. Um, can we streamline that
and get it to you quicker, make it
easier? Because I mean it
the onus is on us not only to improve
the health outcomes for Kuckians and
it's it's clear that what you're doing
will improve that health outcomes on for
Kuckians
and we need to make sure that if you
know six months is great but it'd be
even better if we could do it in three.
um
>> more direct access or or you know it it
sounds like we need to be putting some
effort in in looking at how we can
improve that um for you all.
>> I I can't tell you how grateful I am
that that was your comment um about how
can we streamline it, how can we not
accept 6 months as as the as the
benchmark. Um I think you're you're
right. I think that there is a lot of
opportunity. I think we at UK are also
still trying to figure out how to get
data in and out of places and make sure
things are secure. Um, and it and I do
want to just say that like he said, data
privacy is is our fundamental. We need
to make sure that that's important. But
we do think that there is a lot of
things with remote patient monitoring
with these predictive analytics. There's
a lot more things that we can be doing.
um you know and and I won't go into kind
of those details, but the truth of the
matter is that this technology is so
fresh and new that that I'm not entirely
sure I know what questions to to ask for
right now. Like I don't know I can't we
didn't think that we would have this
opportunity to ask for something here.
Um but if we if you don't mind I'll come
back to you as as this goes on. Um
because I anticipate over the next 6 to
12 months we we're going to have more
sophisticated understanding of truly the
things that we can pull off um and if
you are able to work with us u that we
would love that. I I can I add to that
just quickly. I think making this a
dynamic conversation that as we
encounter uh opportunities uh where we
think we can make a difference if we can
reach back out to you guys. Madam Chair,
>> 100%. I think Representative Brace or
the question I was going to ask is what
do you need from us? I remember Cody
Bumgard testified last year and talked
about how important Kucky's data was
that we don't want California, we don't
want New York, we want Kucky's data so
we can better impact Kuckians. And so we
we want this to be a dynamic
conversation where you're talking to us
about what we can do to streamline
provide better act access to data more
quickly. Whatever we need to do on our
side, I think we want to be a good
partner because time is money. And if we
can provide better care for people and
extend their life earlier while also
reducing costs, that is something we are
very much interested in and being a
front leader I think on those
conversations because of a research
capacity that we have is is really
exciting. I mean especially if we have
doctors who are going willing to stay
here. That's what we want. We don't want
them going to New York.
So, you've definitely have a willing
partner and the the conversation is
always open. Representative Layman, did
you have a question?
>> Yes. Thanks, Madam Chair. Quick question
just with I I hear a lot of it. There's
been a lot of federal cuts, NIH funding,
other federal fundings and grants. How's
your financial situation? And again,
talking about keeping people here in
Kentucky. It's going to be a budget
year. I'm sure you have requests, but
can you just let us know how that's
going financially?
Yeah, I I would say that you know that's
uh uh thank you for the question,
Representative Layman. Uh you uh the
budget um in terms of what we're doing
with these projects is we have
everything we need to succeed is is is
our perspective on the budget at the
university level. that's beyond, you
know, I was actually on the board last
year and stuff and like the budget's
been approved and uh I would I would
tell you that our fiscal uh perspective
at the university is you know we're
always concerned given that the federal
government has said in over the next 10
years it's going to be what is it 900
billion in cuts. you know, that
definitely catches your attention and
you know, it's a part of our onus for
wanting to address these uh, you know,
Medicaid costs and helping more Kuckians
because we can save the state money and
help everyone's budget. And so, for us,
it's truly what fuels us in terms of
trying to make a difference.
>> Thank you. Can I just ask a followup? I
I guess I'm more specific on do do you
have federal grants that help subsidize
some of the work you're doing or some of
your research or
>> have you lost those grant? I'm just
trying to understand if there's holes
that need to be filled.
>> Uh so the answer is no. We do we have
not lost uh uh uh funding for anything
that we're doing. We have internal
grants and you know that's was frankly a
part of our uh the significance of
submitting to the state university
partnership is it's matching funds and
that's the intent of us working towards
that.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> Thank you. And I think um just to
maximize on that budget requests are
important and what we can do to help um
do some match funding or take on more
research. which I think that's really
important especially on the healthcare
side. So I'll just mention at the end
thank you all for coming and giving us
some things to think about. I hope
you'll continue the conversation with us
as we go into next year. And then lastly
I just want to know if we can also take
that tech 100 class.
>> I I'm somewhat getting somewhat on I I
think that we are working on how do we
get this out to people. Um, you know,
we, like I said at the beginning of all
this, we we do accept that
responsibility that we are the ones who
have the people around who can build
things like this. And so we want to get
it out. We want to get it out to our
faculty, to our staff, and then out to
the community at large. Um, and so we'll
we'll keep you posted on that one.
>> Awesome. Thank you both very much for
coming today and talking and for your
time. And then lastly, we have one more
item on our agenda and that is um
Senator Williams, if you want to talk a
little bit about um protecting personal
information from AI scraping, you're
welcome to do it from here or at the
table.
Sorry. Okay, let me back up uh real
quick. So, essentially what this does is
for AI scraping of government
information only. Does not invite
involve the private sector does not
involve any ability of anybody to come
in and get data at the county clerk or
PVAs or whatever. What it is to do is to
prevent AI from scraping personal
information from the web on that. And to
that extent we add address of residence
and personal phone number to the
definition the existing definition of
personal information to prevent that.
And we require the locals as well as the
state to have a policy about what they
publish on um the internet for scraping.
some of this. I mean, it just seems to
make sense that your personal address is
personal information. The other thing
that's not as uh intuitive is that your
picture these days is also a biometric
that can be used by a AI if it's
associated with your name to go out
there and scrape a lot of other uh
information. So that also is added on
here is that you cannot publish without
somebody's permission their picture,
their address, their phone number on
that. That's just clearly is what we
want to do. Anybody can ask any
questions on that. But um you can have
it behind what is defined as a secure
internet system right now like PVAs.
When I go up there, I you can get any
everything about you and your address,
your home. Right now, some of them allow
anybody to go in there and just get it,
which an AI bot can do, but a lot of
them have it behind a firewall, okay? Or
behind a a password, right? That would
be okay. Uh I think in the future we
might say it's got to be a certain level
of security for that password, such as
um it's got to have third-party or
multiffactor authentication. But that's
what the policy is about for the local
governments to establish a policy. Coot
has a policy and this will say that's
the base policy for all these local
governments. There may be some comments.
I don't I think it will be something
that is going to have to be phased in
over a few years on this. And um I think
beyond this uh we're looking at training
for local officials. We met with the
Ohio Cyber Center, Senator Neimus and I
did a couple days ago. We're going to
Georgia. So, there's a lot more to this,
but this is just focused on AI
information and government publication
of data. Any questions?
>> Uh, yes, Senator Thomas.
>> Senator Williams, let me first say that
I always enjoy the questions you ask on
this task force. I mean, I'm I'm I'm I'm
always clued in to the questions that
you ask.
Well, when you're talking about
scraping, maybe I had a different idea
than what you were articulating just
now, you are you talking about scraping
in terms of information gathering and
collection as opposed to scraping in
terms of uh eliminating or
extinguishing? Because it sounds like to
me what you're you're talking about is
you want to stop AI from gathering
information about your personal address
or your age or or where you work as
opposed to uh eliminating AI from from
um from uh from having those uses. Am I
correct? You're talking Yeah. I'm not
This is about eliminating this is not
restricting AI or AI bots. What this is
is individuals have to give personal
information to the government,
>> right,
>> on our government
>> such as our address or our age,
>> our name, our address, all sorts of
stuff. Some of that personal information
is already prohibited from publication.
It it is not prohibited from internal
use, from uh secure password access. But
one of the things that isn't prohibited
right now is your address and your phone
number. Okay? You have to give that to
the government. the government p
publishes it and in a number of on a web
and so an AI bot can scrape that and get
that information about where you live.
Okay? And and so we're not saying they
can't that a bot's still out there
scraping commercial information,
scraping other things. We're not
stopping that. But I have a choice on
whether I'm going to allow a commercial
provider to publish some of my
information. I give it to them. I don't
have a choice on whether I give the
government information.
>> I know what you mean by scraping. Now,
that that that's what I'm trying to
clarify.
>> Okay.
>> I understand what you mean by scraping.
>> Yeah, scraping.
>> Uh crawling the web.
>> Yeah, if you have arachnophobia,
uh I could give you a description that
would make your skin crawl, but anyway,
uh we use some buzzwords. Thank you very
much.
>> Sorry for the buzzwords.
>> Okay. I don't think we have any more
conversation about that item. If you are
interested, please reach out to Senator
Williams uh as he's got a draft bill of
that legislation for this coming year.
>> Yes. All right. Well, with that, um, we
will stand adjourned. The next meeting
is October 9th at 9:00 a.m. Thank you
very much.